    
@ It all starts with researching about the domain . 
@ It is always good to know as much as possible about the domain . 
@ There are many types of databases out there .  Need to find a database that address the problem at hand. Many times database get a bad name just because they are used in a way they are not intended to be use. 
@ Roles of a database user must be clearly identified . And privileges must be granted according to the need. 
@ All the passwords that is stored in the database must be hashed.  
@ Tables and columns in a table  must be named consistently . Table name should not consists of spaces. Table names should not have unnecessary prefixes. 
@ It is always  a good idea to have a primary key to a table.
@ Indexing is a good idea but use it with caution. Indexes will decrease speed with  which insert , update and deletion is done. Also indexing takes up space.  Use Tools that will determine the need of indexes on particular column instead of guesswork.
@ One must be aware of all  the data types in the problem domain.  And use the appropriate data types when designing a database. 
@ Whenever a select query is being used it is always a good idea not to use select *  from .... 
@ Even though the application will handle data validations . Database should also enforce it. 
@ There should be a procedure to backup a database as often as needed. This can often be achieved by a simple cron job or a taskscheduler. 
@ It is always a must to document the database .  Entity relation or ER diagrams must be used properly . It is a good idea to start a database design with a ER diagram .  
@ Placing a database and a web server on different machines will give security and performance increase. 
@ Database replication can be used used for load balancing  wherever applicable. 
@ I kept this for last database normalization.  Most performance issues are caused either by not normalizing the database or by too much normalization .  In my experience if the database is normalized to third normal form it is more enough in most cases. It is very important to know what works best. 

Indexes broadly 2 types  --->  clustered  and non clustered index.
 
Clustered Index
1)       Example Primary key.
2)      Common analogy index in a book.
3)       There can only be one clustered index for a table.
4)      Data is physically arranged or sorted  on the disk in a  particular order (sorted on index keys).
Advantages.
   Very efficient to retrieve data .
 
Disadvantage.
If there is a update on  a clustered index; database might have to move the entire row into a new position to keep the row sorted. So this will actually be a delete query followed by an insert. (hence PK or FK is usually right candidates for clustered index)
 
Non clustered index
1)      Common analogy Reference in a book
2)      Stores all the index keys and its reference to the record on the disk .
3)      Can have as many as we want on a particular table.
4)      Doesn’t care about the order in which the record is stored.
 
Advantages
  If we make a indexes on columns on which mostly uses where clause or group by clause; performance of a query can be increased.
 
Disadvantage
1)      Slightly slower than clustered index.
2)      Can take up lot of space.
3)      Going back to analogy if every word in the book is put in a reference then , reference becomes as big as the book .
4)      If the row is updated  or deleted the reference has to be updated as well.

Hope everyone is following the above listed things . Please feel to disagree with me on any point. Lets see what everyone thinks.  
